Finland,[b] officially the Republic of Finland,[c] is a Nordic country in Northern Europe. It borders Sweden to the northwest, Norway to the north, and Russia to the east, with the Gulf of Bothnia to the west and the Gulf of Finland to the south, opposite Estonia. Its capital and largest city is Helsinki. Finland has a population of 5.7 million.[1] The official languages are Finnish and Swedish, the mother tongues of 83.5 percent and 5.0 percent of the population, respectively.[1][10] Finland's climate varies from humid continental in the south to boreal in the north. Its land is predominantly covered by boreal forest, with over 180,000 recorded lakes.[11][12]

Finland was first settled around 9000 BC after the last Ice Age.[13] During the Stone Age, various cultures emerged, distinguished by different styles of ceramics. The Bronze Age and Iron Ages were marked by contacts with other cultures in Fennoscandia and the Baltic region.[14] From the middle of the 13th century, Finland became part of Sweden during the Northern Crusades. In 1809, as a result of the Finnish War, Finland was captured from Sweden and became an autonomous grand duchy within the Russian Empire. During this period, Finnish art flourished and an independence movement gradually developed.

Following the Russian Revolution of 1917, Finland declared its independence. A civil war ensued the following year, with the anticommunist Whites emerging victorious. Finland's status as a republic was confirmed in 1919. During World War II, Finland fought against the Soviet Union in the Winter War and the Continuation War, and later against Nazi Germany in the Lapland War. As a result, it lost parts of its territory to the Soviet Union but retained its independence and democracy. During the Cold War, Finland embraced an official policy of neutrality. After the Cold War, Finland became a member of the European Union in 1995 and the Eurozone in 1999. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Finland joined NATO in 2023.

Finland became the first country in Europe to grant universal suffrage in 1906, and the first in the world to give all adult citizens the right to run for public office.[note 2] Finland remained a largely rural and agrarian country until the 1950s, when it pursued rapid industrialisation and a Nordic-style welfare state, resulting in an advanced economy and high per capita income. The country consistently ranks highly in international rankings across various categories, such as education, economic competitiveness, happiness, and prosperity. Finnish foreign policy based on its middle power status emphasizes international cooperation and partnership, which has recently shifted towards closer ties with NATO. Finnish cultural values, including egalitarianism, secularism, human rights, and environmentalism, are actively promoted through membership in multiple international forums.

Finland is known by two unrelated names: Suomi (Finnish for 'Finland'), used in Finnish and, in corresponding forms, in the other Finnic languages; and Finland, of Old Norse origin, used in Swedish and in most other languages. The origin of both is uncertain. Explanations deriving Suomi from suo ('mire') or suomu ('scale') are rejected on semantic and morphological grounds; current discussion centres on a Baltic loan etymology linking Suomi to the province name Häme and the Sámi endonym sápmi, and on the view that Suomi and sápmi continue a common Finno-Samic self-designation.[16][17][18] The Old Norse element finnr behind Finland appears to have been a Scandinavian term for northern neighbours in general, denoting the Sámi in Norwegian usage and the inhabitants of south-western Finland in Swedish usage.[19]

In the earliest historical sources, from the 12th and 13th centuries, the term Finland refers to the coastal region around Turku (Swedish: Åbo) in the southwest of modern Finland; this region later became known as Finland Proper in distinction from the country name Finland.[20][21] The Latin form Finlandia began to appear in the titles of the bishops of Åbo from 1221.[22]

In the 14th and 15th centuries, the southwest (Eura and Turku), the interior (around Lake Päijänne), and the southeast (reaching Lake Ladoga) regions of modern Finland were incorporated into the Swedish realm; the entire area was called Finlandia et partes orientales by the Scandinavians, and the interior was known as Tavastia.[21] From 1308 Österland ("Eastland"), originally the territories east of Finland Proper, served as the official designation of the eastern part of the realm; from 1464, and especially after 1500, Finland displaced it, and Österlandet appeared in official documents for the last time in 1525.[22][23] By the end of the Middle Ages, the term Finland had thus been extended to the east as well.[24]